#summary Ideas for Backwoods Logger improvements and new features
#labels Featured

Want to get involved with the Backwoods Logger project? Start by joining the [http://groups.google.com/group/backwoods-logger-discuss discussion list]. Here are a few ideas for Logger improvements and new features:

= Art = 
 * Create a Backwoods Logger logo, to use on future boards and the Google Code project page 
 * Make a better splash screen/logo for the Logger's "unlock" screen 
 * Design a case for the Logger Mini or Logger Classic that can be built by an online fabrication site like Ponoko 

= Software = 
 * Add more detailed analysis tools to the software. Rate of ascent graphs, day by day statistics comparisons, user-defined graph timescales, etc.
 * Alarm clock, stopwatch, and other general timer features 
 * Improved weather forecasting logic (what's there now is very weak) 
 * Different/better selection of graph timescales and graph exploration tools 
 * Improved graph rendering 
 * Better LCD contrast/bias controls for the Logger Classic 
 * Improved snapshot functionality - tags? comments? auto-snapshots? 
 * Preload the elevation profile of your expected route onto the logger before starting a trip, then compare measured altitude samples with the preloaded profile to determine where you are.

= Hardware =
 * Modify the Logger Mini board layout to make hand-assembly easier 
 * Help design additional Logger variants using different display screens 
 * Add a way to download the stored sample data to your PC or phone
 * Make a version of the Logger Classic that uses the higher-resolution OLED found on the Mini

= Everything Else = 
 * Any cool idea that you're excited to work on!